Going to take you from draft zero to craft Hero with.
Oh, dear.
Hi. I'm chas fisher. And welcome to draft zero. A podcast with two Ozzie. Filmmakers try to work out what makes great screenplays work.
And I'm stu willis.
And in this episode we are doing Part two of our two ish part series on unfilmables and unscripted Bols.
And in this episode we are looking at moments off all those really cinematic experiences that take your breath away, and we're interested in how writers write them on the page.
And so the films we are looking at are you were never really here, searching for Bobby Fischer, the Invitation and moonlight and many things to our patrons for helping us vote on what films that we should look at.
What do we mean by moments of all to kind of roll back and we'll Hopefully you've listened to the previous part.
This film, it's second part's going to make less sense, so we're particularly interested in the ground of context.
This conversation between Charles and I actually started as part of a three way conversation with a friend of the podcast, Ben Missy, who directed The Snip that was written by Charles.
And he was asking kind of like it different question, but has seen that he had a character coming into a cathedral, and I kind of was like, Do I have him talk to people the way.
Like for me, it was like, Well, this feels like it's one of those moments than on screen will be about the character coming in and taking in this kind of wondering ce thing built over generations.
In fact, Benz words were, you know.
You know, he admires thie building, that such a long time gold built in service by the parishioners and the people around them. So it was about a moment of recognising something greater than the individual.
But he was interested in how he writes it on the page.
And that's what got us thinking about unfilmables. And that was a specific what I would call a moment off. All that is what led to Part one because there's a difference.
Like doing something like a cinematic like Take your breath away moment can be in a scene or more a ll. The stuff we're looking at is actually over sequences.
That's what we're looking at today. Like specifically.
I mean this episode, we kind of reverse engineered, you know, we had what we wanted to achieve, and in this case, it was Ben's.
Like, How do you write those amazing cinematic or inspiring moments on the page?
And then we went looking for examples on DH what the we loved amazing beats on amazing projects that felt very cinematic on looking at the script.
And we decided to build up to this part, too, because there were so many different elements of unfilmables that all kind of,
you know, whether they're talking about performance beads or whether trying to convey tone or emotion or pace,
they all would come together to create these bigger cinematic moments.
So yes, and in.
That was out. That was our theory anyway. Andi e just wanna say thanks to Ben that inspiring this discussion, even if it wasn't his body was actually asking in that.
E obviously dear listener, if you're just coming on this episode, probably go back to the previous episode.
But I figure that some time has passed almost a month.
I think since we recorded the last one and my learnings from the past episode have certainly solidified Ah lot on.
I thought we might go back over briefly that the key things that we took about in terms of when unfilmables and unscripted bals are used well,
so my favourite was one of your observations, which was the sandwich technique, which is, if you're going to use an unfilmables.
Two have the unfilmables into play with unfilmables things very clearly what the camera can see and what the audience can hear.
And I think you called it the sandwich technique because we looked at quite a few examples that used it where there would be a big chunk of action and the first line was like,
unfilmables sort of tone setting sentence on. Then it went into what the camera can actually see and what the audience is experiencing. And then it ended that paragraph with another sort of concluding,
unfilmables, and it led to very easy reading.
There are often kind of like punch lines without necessarily being funny.
And I guess that's kind of like the variation, because we talked about, like, top and tailing that you can use both, you know, But often the opening one is about the tone for about what you're going to read.
And then the one at the end is the lack of a better word, like the punch line on that could be a moment off.
Making you go. Oh, I no understand what this was about because it's telling you the theme right or it's telling you the meaning.
Or it could be, in the case of, like, Lethal Weapon and actual joke.
But it's that kind of punch line, and I think I'd clarify the sandwich technique. As a general rule of thumb is, that's how to think about it.
If you open with it unfilmable, it's about the tone, and if you end with it, it's about the punch line. It's revelatory, you know him.
And we didn't dig into this particular observation in the last episode as much as I thought we would.
But I think we will in this episode, and that is unfilmables or anything that you write in.
A script is kind of servicing three different audience members, and I guess the risk off how unfilmables it is or how much it may bump a reader or,
get in the way off your script,
depends on how much how many of these different groups that services.
So those through three different audiences that we identified our are you writing something that is for the reader and the whole script is obviously for the reader.
You don't write anything in a script that isn't for the reader.
Are you writing something for the crew and amusing crew? Broadly, because most examples we looked at it definitely were performance unfilmables.
But there's many production design, music, tone, lighting, editing all of those.
Their house line in lethal weapons is for as much for the production designer.
But we'll see when we get to wish you I wish you were never here. You were never really here. We should never hear. What the hell is that film you were never really Here is definitely a shooting script.
And there's moments as you'll see we're here, thanks to Chris, that kind of very much to like Like a shot list there for crew.
And, you know, they're further sound designers like it's actually like a Lego instruction set in some ways, like an instruction manual.
But I think crew and actors, I would personally in my head separate.
In terms of different unfilmables.
Yeah, so I'd say reader crew actors. And in the last one.
Which is audience. So if you write anything that the camera can see and that the audience will hear, that's clearly information that will get to the audience.
And the feeling is the reason. While these screenplay gurus,
and not just screenplay gurus as we'll soon hear some draft zero listeners as well say that you write only what you can see and what Khun here as the audience members, that is the safest,
way off communicating in through screenplay form.
There's the least amount of risk of bumping the reader or one of the risks.
I think there's there is writing a script that isn't that is amazing to read.
But when it actually gets produced, some of that magic that might have all been in unfilmables doesn't translate. Does it become you know, those dreaded words execution dependent?
Yeah, like films are not execution. I mean, clearly, Sony doesn't think they should be.
That is giving such a dated reference by the time that we actually get through post on this oversight.
Yeah, they'll have given it back to Disney. There's going to be it's going to be some weird power player in the money.
So the next general observation that I had is that from our homework in part one is that often unfilmables,
are in fact clearer on DME or efficient,
at conveying what the audience may be seeing and feeling by what they see in here, then writing exactly what the camera can see.
And we did have some contrast ing examples on that. So sometimes I think there is a call to use on unfilmables, where it actually is a tighter, better way of writing a screenplay.
And the final observation that I had is it's actually your observation from Part one, but I really loved it is the best unfilmables that we read.
We're specifically, um, specific. Or did you say.
Or university specific.
In that they were an incredibly specific description off something that could not be specifically seen or heard?
But it invited the audience in particular the reader to use their imagination.
And the best example I can think off is from a quiet place where it said the sound is the most frightening sound imaginable. I'm paraphrasing. That's not the exact quote.
Yeah, almost horrifying thing you've ever heard or something like that doesn't actually tell you what it sounds like.
But it means you fill in the blanks, so to speak.
Exactly.
And there's a complete absence of something that we'll talk about coming into,
the bad unfilmables, which is exposition notice. All this stuff is actually talking about clarity of feeling, Mohr efficient riding, engaging animation who you were talking too often. We really just talking about feeling on tone and a little bit of theme.
We're not talking about information, but we'll get into that.
So what is it being interesting doing? This exercise for Maine,
is there's a few things that I've reread of mine where I'm like I could actually use a not not necessarily in unfilmables but a more efficient way to communicate this idea.
A less specific way.
Yeah, so it's kind of got me thinking about rewriting a few moments.
So what we're actually going to do and the reason that we joked that this is kind of like a second final part of what may be a three part episode is that we're going to do a kind of follow up to unfilmables.
We've got a few listening questions already about unfilmables asking for some clarity on We've got us reflecting on our own personal riding in experiences that we've had.
So we're actually going to do another episode after this one looking at that.
So if you've got any thoughts about unfilmables good or bad examples,
any questions? I know we had a question on Reddit about using kind of more technical information like Time of day, explicitly like three o'clock PM in a script.
So please email them, preferably as an audio recording, which Khun due Invoice me moves on your phone at Ask at draught hyphen zero dot com, and hopefully will use that as a way of kind of having a general discussion.
You know, we're going to take you from draft zero to craft hero with.
Oh, dear.
Good. It's Terry. We're talking about craft beer, right?
Ah.
Yeah. Well, I'm drinking one s o. That is what we learn. And we only used amazing examples because that's what we do here. It drops here we try and learn from the best. We try and work out what makes great screenplays work.
That's why we never read any of our own stuff. Next one is going to be learning, learning what doesn't work from ouster.
But because we didn't do bad unfilmables And when unfilmables don't work, it led a friend of the podcasts and previous guest too. Right in with the following.
Yes. Speak, Julio.
Hello, student Chazz loved the unfilmables episode. Loved it.
But I also have this nagging feeling in the back of my head as I was listening to it,
because you guys sang the praises of well written unfilmables so well and didn't really address the fact that there's such a thing as terribly written wrong. Vilma, Bols.
I kind of started fearing that maybe you were unintentionally indirectly encouraging people to also write those, and that gave me a little bit of anxiety.
I'm a writer, I'm a director, but I'm also reader, both for coverage and for screening purposes.
I see a lot of bad unfilmables don't write with You can see on the screen didn't come out of nowhere.
I mean, as much as I love to shed on screenwriting gurus, I just finished reading his screenplay where whenever the writer introduced a new character, you give me their entire resume.
Don't tell me Carl is Josh's ex girlfriend. The description showed that to me in the scene, either through dialogue or through her behaviour.
Don't use the description to tell me Michael is a private detective. When I'm watching the movie, I won't know until he tells someone or until he does something that reveals him as a private detective.
Then there's also stuff like example stew used where Chast stares out the window, thinking about how much to annoys him now. I think that's the kind of line where context determines how much it works.
If it all is this line coming after a serious of scenes where we've seen Stuart annoying chests or does it open the script?
Have we even seen Stew interact with chess? The answers to those questions make a big difference, and whether that kind of unfilmables works, regardless of who ends up directing it.
And then finally, just a note on something Chasse set. I think it was during their hereditary discussion when he mentioned that on the screenplay, you have the luxury of being able to go back and re read stuff that might have been too complicated in the first past.
Now that's true, but it's not necessarily a positive.
As a reader, I can tell you if I have to stop reading and go back to read something that wasn't clear at first.
More than likely we have a problem, and that's because this spell is broken I'm taking out the storey, and as a reader, I value dispel a lot.
It's one of the things that used to gauge the quality of a writer, how much they managed to immerse me in the world.
Of course, if the screenplay fantastic, it's not going to matter if I have to go back and re read a couple of things.
But a lot of the time it's the little things that that up and leave you a bad impression of the writer anyway.
Love the show. Like I said, I just wanted to share some thoughts. Can't wait for Part two.
So we're going toe linked to two. Resource is in particular Scott Myers go into the storey block.
He did a Siri's of good and bad unfilmables, and this was complemented by a block post by the bitter script reader, former guest on draft zero on DH.
What both of them reiterated or made very clear that the kind of biggest no no in unfilmables in terms of writing in action,
is writing plot information that the audience will never received because it's only being written in the big print.
And that's what Julio is saying is well, in terms of character backstory,
whether someone's a private detective or whether someone's someone else is X doesn't actually matter unless it does matter, and you haven't given that information to the audience.
Yes, so they're kind of called X positional unfilmables, and they are contextual, and that leads to polio.
Contact. Comment about context is key because, for example, a relationship unfilmables is something that I've used but constantly and to be honest, kind of defining the dynamic between a pilot that we've been working on.
But I think it's because we're still dramatising it. So a good example, which is an easy example, is, say, describing someone is the mother of a child or the father of a child.
Right? So you know, Sally and bastard playing in the in the water and Sally starts yelling at Bast Bast each as the children's father walks over and says, Dale, it's not doing that. YouTube.
We're going to start interpreting the interaction between the two children and Chazz with the understanding that he is the father, right?
Do you mean as an audience member watching the finished?
Yes, absolutely. I think, as always, that I've kind of been claiming my beating drum in drugs.
There is, I think performance is easier to understand on the screen. We get a better sense of human relationships on screen with the way the people dress, the way they look, the way they interact than you do on the page.
So hey, you two stop that is going to play very differently on screen if it's not the children's father versus if they are.
But if all you have the dialogue is on the page, you actually need that little bit of exposition to clarify again. Clarify the relationship, right?
Does that does that make sense? So I'm just saying that like their relationships are, some think that,
I can help you understand in interaction, which hopefully, if you're a good writer and this is the key, if you're a good writer that you'll be communicating through your dialogue anyway,
that, like unfortunately, the difficulty is people talk about this stuff and there was some guy I know.
There's some going already getting annoyed about ife.
You know, I've read all the guru books and all the rules that you break. And then I read these award winning screenplays and they break all the rules, and it's like it's because they khun, right? That is the short answer.
But I think they also know exactly how to write for the screen as well.
You know, we'll get we'll get there when we get to the examples. But you can tell by their use of when they use unfilmables and what they write that they know that it is ultimately suitable.
It's not as unfilmables it reads. And I think you're right there. It is about context being key, and I think, you know, using your example of the dad yelling at the children.
If that person telling the children off isn't there, Father?
Yes, there's a performance beat that the actor can perform that somewhat, and it might be in the dialogue like, Hey, you two, Can you please, like, just keep it down a bit like something like that?
But I think the audience will still read that character as being the father of those children.
Unless there is something additionally, dramatised two make that clear.
Exactly, because if or yes because if that that will be the assumption. And if it's specifically to use an example, if it's someone that's not their parent yelling at them, it's so it is transgressive.
And so unless there's a consequence to it, which is Hey, why you yelling at my kids or one of the kids saying Fuck off stranger or something like that, right?
Like my parents told me to speak to strangers, there's actually no consequence to it. So the problem is of that unfilmables explaining a relationship is if there's no consequence to it, it's actually irrelevant, which comes back to the bad riding thing.
And I know we're kind of slightly going off topic. But if you're writing Exposition A ll exposition in the big print, right, that's to say things like the private.
If you're not, if you're saying you're a private detective, you never showing the Riedel, the audience or the crews that there are private detective, they don't have it because clearly it makes it's actually not, you know, in the storey in any meaningful way.
Sure, but I can imagine someone might write in Chazz thirties dentist, And the fact that Chazz is a dentist would never, ever be relevant.
But it would actually paint a picture for someone.
Oh yeah, having once upon a time working worked a lot for dentists.
Let's really way too much of my backstory. Yes. Describing someone as a dentist would definitely paint a picture of their kind of personality, right?
The impression I don't want to get hung up too much on this, right?
Yeah, but I want I want to take two things out of what Julio said, which is Writing Exposition in big Print is really risky.
If there's if that exposition is not dramatised on DH, it goes into the broader idea that Julia raised.
The context is key, and I think all the unfilmables that built these huge cinematic moments, we're going to look at them and we're going to see that they work because of the context that's already been built by those writers.
These aren't in isolation. They're not the little micro moments we picked out in part one, these air, the culmination ofthe a Siri's of dramatised events, most of which are not using unfilmables.
But I think the other big point that Julia made is there's a trade off in unfilmables.
Even if you are a great writer, it is the risk of breaking the spell.
So the trade off is when you're using an unfilmables is you risk bumping the readers out of the storey and the trade off is you made a great observation when someone was querying this on Reddit like wood.
The screenplays that we analysed in part one have made just a cz good and products in films and TV.
If they hadn't used the unfilmables and you said you answer them, yes, they would have been just a CZ good on screen. But would they have gotten made?
Would those script have inspired readers? Produces actors crew to go on that journey?
Because would the themes, the tone, the performances thie emotion have come across is clearly without the use of thie unfilmables. So it is a trade off and we take your point. Julio.
I think one of the things will get to is judicious use on DH.
There's particularly judicious use of unfilmables in. You were never really here.
I believe. Senator Albert Photo. His daughter's missing.
Get from here.
Go! What is going on?
You were never Really Here is a film written and directed by Lynne Ramsay, adapted from a novella.
And then, well, I actually have a feeling that the right and then made the knot novella into a novel because after the film, Curious anything.
So essentially the film is about Joe paid by working Phoenix, who he is a CZ. We will learn a traumatised kind of hired Got, a mercenary who rescues girls, have been trafficked and is particularly brutal against their captors.
He also cares for his elderly mother in his childhood homes. We lives with his mother in New York City.
We kind of have flashbacks of both the abuse that he and his mother face from his violent father, as well as a Brill, particularly brutal past in both the military and the FBI.
And he's also suicidal. That's kind of like the larger context for the film, because in a way, this is the psychological action thriller version ofthe taken off Spartan.
You know, we've seen this model of this genre of film before, you know, angry, violent man extract revenge by rescuing girls.
That's kind of it, and it's directed with such kind of keen psychological insight, insight as well as incredible cinematic verve like incredible cinematic style that we will like.
Let's see how they do this on the page and the answer is.
Well, they don't or she doesn't on the page. Which is not to say it's not a remarkable film. I watched the film first and on slack.
I was pinging You saying We have to do this moment. We have to look how she wrote this moment on this moment. In this moment, the film is so inherently cinematic that I couldn't imagine how she wrote a lot of these moments on the page on DH.
Sadly, the truth is often she didn't.
And I just want to say we're looking at a not just a shooting script.
We are looking at the Golden Rod shooting script, which means that there's been so those who don't know it was white, blue, pink, yellow, green, golden run.
So there's Bean since they started shooting, I had a lock shooting script which can often just be on the first day of principal photography.
Or I've actually worked on the film where they tried to issue a white shoe script like a week into this principal photography. And there's a whole bunch of re numbered scenes, which was fucking insane.
You know enough about that like we're talking about, like 8123456 So it's like the fifth revision after the white draught.
My point is that we don't know. Maybe there was a version of this screenplay Britain by Lynne Ramsay that was not as kind of verbatim or whatever you want to call this writing style.
This is death. 100% reads like a shooting script to me, and there may have been a version for it, which is a lot more for the reader.
Thiss is the example of a script that is for a crew and for actors, but for a crew.
Yeah, that's true. However, two of the most cinematic moments for me in the film one is which he's come home.
However, however.
His mother has been killed by two hit men. He comes down, says to find the hit men he shoots, both of them on.
Then one of them is dying on the floor, and after he's questioned their hitman, the character Joe, he then comforts the hitman as his don't.
And this moment really struck me so powerfully, partly because it's unexpected. But it's also quiet and lingering. And here is Chris, a reading Lynne Ramsay's description of that scene.
Interior staircase hallway, Mother's house Day Joe comes down the stairs like an express train gun drawn.
One continuous move takes him as he spins, firing two shots in quick succession.
Background Music
A long, eerie silence broken by the beep of an incoming text message and the faint sound of a gunman's fingernails scratching at the floor reveal one gun. Man kills over dead.
The other is on his belly, crawling away towards the kitchen interior kitchen.
Mother's House. Day staying low, Joe stands over to the body of the dead gunman.
He riffles through his jacket pocket for his phone, reads the text. Is he there yet?
Joe Types or quiet and hit send close on Joe's hand, filling a glass of water from the force. It the same 1990 pop hit Heard and Kuwait Place from the radio.
He gropes a chintzy Tito, then slides down the sink unit to the floor.
Close on the bottle. Pills from the Midtown drug dealer. Joe shakes out two pills. He downs one.
The second gunman lies slumped across from Joe. He's in bad shape, bleeding out from the bullet to the stomach.
Joe tosses the gunmen the chintzy detail the gunman uses his free hand toe limply, clutch it to his stomach to staunch the bleeding.
Joe crawls towards him, feeds him the other pill.
Holding the glass of water to his lips, Joe pulls himself into a sitting position beside the gunman.
The gunman looks at him. Unfocused. Joe. Where's the girl?
Ah, hard cut in the off screen radio music. Later in the song, a different tempo Time has passed.
Gunmen far away. Ah, hard cut in the off screen radio music, gunmen continued, eyes glazed safer than a dirty old man.
Joe is now on the other side of the gunman. He rests his fingers on the man's neck, feeling his pulse.
Joe, you work for him. Gunmen. Thie other way around.
The gunman smirks, looks about to pass out gunmen in sync with lyrics on the kitchen, Radio continued. I wish someone had talked to me like I want to talk to you, Joe. What do you have on him?
Gunmen around out of places and friendly faces? I've been to paradise, but I've never been to me, he sparks out, Ah, hard cut in the off screen radio music, Joe nudges the gunman again.
Gunmen continued to. Mother knew the gunman's suddenly wide awake, staring with hyper alertness. He reaches for Joe's hand, takes it and holds it tight.
Joe, Where's the girl?
The gunman stares at him past him. Joe gently takes the gunman's hand that still clinches the blood soaked agency detail to his stomach.
Gunmen, Her old man knows. He presses it firmly over the gunman's nose and mouth.
There is definitely this very we'd moment off. How does that uses sound?
Very ephemeral. E sound lot of family, like almost lynch. Ian Lee Remember? Like the kind of time jumpy time gentleness you? Almost.
Even though it's from your kind of In Joe's prv, it almost switches into that hit the dying hit Man's Moments, This sense of time elapsing and it's written in this really interesting, very,
kind of a bait on explanation for how it's going to work.
I hard cut, Ah, hard cut, You know, it explains what it's actually doing cinematically, and I love this gun man in sync with the lyrics on the kitchen radio.
But the feeling of the scene that Joe is comforting. Thie gun man, that there? Yeah, that the connexion that they have, the feeling of that scene does not come across in these pages.
Because it's not what what this style of writing is. It's a shooting script.
But I think what I found largely is interesting about it is it's an explanation off the cinematic technique they're going to use without any clarification of what the meaning is.
Why are we hard cutting his hard cock? You know there is a version when it's like he's singing along with the lyrics on the radio, and it says, you know this crates of this kind of feeling or what have you so.
Yeah, Yeah.
Absolutely like, It's interesting that even though we've kind of re read it now and kind of like, Oh, it's kind of there it's kind of there.
Well, the actions of their but not the feeling.
Exactly. I actually what I'm saying is this kind of proves your point. I'm not.
Well, it proves my point, but I think you're absolutely right where what we're missing is there could have been the spec version ofthe this script that she was going out to attract Joaquin Phoenix and attract financing.
That might have been exactly what we're looking for. The poetic, more narrative literary version of this screenplay.
Then the other one is when he goes to bury his mother.
He in the film, ends up walking her into a lake and,
while submerged with his mother's body, considers not coming to the surface himself, but then does so and gets a renewed sense of mission and purpose as a result of that.
The moment it makes him reconsider. His life Choice is that he is kind of getting lost in the drowning and a tree branch falls into the water and external plot event happens.
That kind of snaps him out of it, the kind of thing that maybe an earlier draught, she had it more ephemeral like then then what's in there with, like her floating towards him and be dreamy.
And some producers like ALS dramatised. And then they've gone on.
And someone wanted it more dramatised.
Let's just make a tree fall in like a plot thing comes along.
So I'm going to jump back and give. Just give two more examples because I think there is a climate of terminology. It's not unfilmables. It's like the opposite.
It's like it's not that it's a film, a bull. It's kind of like a technique herbal.
Or some think right that sometimes you need to be very clear with how you choose to shoot something.
So I'm going to go massively into the title sequence so it's written literally like a shot list. Close up, show you this.
Close up and adult man's mouth underwater Joe, he gulps in water. Extreme closer, a clear plastic bag filled with air stretched smooth.
None of it's giving you the feeling of it. She's very clearly writing what she wants to see but not explaining it.
What I'm particularly interested in is the opening scene in the hotel room.
This is before we even know what the character is, and the opening line is montage. Glimpses of methodical process camera tight sounds, Highland Girls Fates, ITT's explanation of how they're going to shoot it.
But it doesn't actually tell you what the feeling is beyond that opening line, which is in italics.
But this is kind of like a more specific version off the havoc phone conversation into Cut the phone conversation.
Your explanation for how you actually Khun shoot the scene. That's exactly what this is doing here, right?
There's another example later on, when he so he get basically, it's this tip on this girl and he goes to rescue from her from a brothel.
Right and look. Part of this whole film is that resists the kind of catharsis of violence, right, because it is kind of pulling back from this idea.
It's not taken. You don't mean to be thrilled by any of this stuff, and it says this time in Peru, parenthetical is rather than it, Alex. But it says.
The following sequence is shot from CCTV point of view until otherwise stated.
It's just very matter of fact how are we going to shoot this? Explain the techniques right?
And it's a very kind of straightforward action riding, you know, with the odd.
Another CCTV angle right reminds us that we transition back.
It's very straightforward, but there is one little moment that I love. That kind of is thie.
Background Music
Very end off. This brothel sequence is.
Born aloft in Joe's arms, Nina floats through the door of her room and along the playground corridor, her counting down a barely perceptible whisper above piped music.
So it's this moment in the script, that very, matter of fact description of how we're seeing all this violence through CCTV footage, a very dry writing style with the violence.
And then it chooses to take a moment to kind of I want a loft. I mean, they could read in that, taken that from a novel, but it's got such a because of the elongated vowels off born aloft.
It kind of lifts it up, and it's just mice moment.
And so it shows. It's perfectly within her power, which is largely focused on this very specific. How do we shoot it? You know.
Yeah, and yes, I'm s I'm feeling somewhat guilty here because I hadn't really thought that she may have actually removed all the things that I'm looking for in this script from the shooting script, but,
because it's so sparse but the opposite or what we have Maybe true.
Maybe because she is a writer director, she has really just written, you know, only the what you Khun see in here.
And she knows on set the qualities that she needs from the material that they get.
Yeah, the last one point out, we'll have to come up with the term for it, which is when he exits Joe exits with the girl. It actually has a line again in the Tallix.
About six minutes have elapsed since Joe entered the brothel.
This is a exposition, A ll line, right.
The audience is going to sit there with the time, Yes, but it's clear that's for the crew.
Yeah, which is in italics.
And it's also meant to give a feeling for how the whole sequence is meant to play out and also any kind of street dressing or time indications on the outside. It's a very interesting choice because I think it's a bad unfilmables.
It's kind of a sleaze is category that's not unfilmables.
I'm kind of circling around because I think, well, end up coming with him. It's not unfilmables.
It's not a film, a bull. It's kind of like a something else, you know.
Well, it's like, in a way, it kind of is because it's not information intended for the audience, right?
It's an instructional. It's an instruction.
That the Yeah, the that audiences won't cheque their watches and go, you know, there's not a watch ticking down from six minutes on 24 on the screen.
So she's felt compelled to write in the script of that point for pacing purposes for plot purposes, for crew to know,
either how long that is taking to six minutes on film feels like a long time or can do or how short it's been.
Yes, exactly how many Christian them instructional sze.
Because montage, this's That's what they are. They're in instruction. Their instruction for the crew, their whole You know, any C. U. Is an instruction.
We shoot this in. You know, a line about this being a montage will close shots. You know, the glimpses of methodical process is camera tight. Sounds hiding. That's an instructional.
So I just christened a new term Whatever.
We'll see how well it sticks anyway. So there was a film that we deliberately went to the script searching for.
How did Lynn convey those amazing cinematic moments? And for the most part, she did it matter of factly.
And that is, you know, that film got made.
It's in the eyes of many people on Masterpiece, and she didn't resort in the shooting script that we have at least two unfilmables. So in a way, it's like going back to Helios cautionary tale.
It can be done without them.
Yeah, closest he's born aloft, but she's just got like her. Writing is little less passed on David Mamet.
There's a little bit more use of Objective describes him as job putting the goal delicately down in the back of the car. She gives enough personality to the action, but she's primarily focused on the action and then how we shoot it. That's the writing style in this.
What do we see and how do we shoot it? Not What does this mean on by shooting? At least there's so many sound design cues. I know you wanna wrap this up, but there's like off screen. This boy's counting suspends Oscar in the boy's monotone whispers.
It's full of direction sound. Rick.
Far.
Sound design in this film is pretty amazing. Mets.
So that was the counter example to the three brilliant uses off unfilmables that build up too big or inspiring moments of cinema, the first of which is Steve's aliens script,
for searching for Bobby Fischer.
World. Tell me, is the next Bobby Fischer somewhere in this room A has begun or something creates? Like like him inside.
Playing not to lose. Josh. You've got to risk losing. You got to risk everything.
Full disclosure. This is one of my absolute favourite films of all time. I cried reading the screenplay as I do when I don't we watch the film, so it's exceptionally good, even stand by me and pretty much my favourite kids films.
So we've kind of gone against our attempt at rules that we tried to set for ourselves in the first part, which is try to avoid writer directors because in a way, it removes a lands.
You know, the writer doesn't have to write for the director.
In the words of Quentin Tarantino correcting us, he's re interpreting his novels that is written on set.
I mean, I think the point is that, aside from Sally and knowing he was going to direct this, he is one of the top paid screenwriters in the business.
And you read this screenplay. And it's not just his storey craft.
The way he writes is so beautifully cinematic.
You know this, right? I understand what cinema is and has found a way to translate it to the page.
That's kind of what I get like, This is the kind of writing that I like. Holy shit. I want to go to write like this.
Well, given that you know the film much better than I do you want to summarise it.
Yeah, look, OK, so my first told you we should do it. You actually thought it was a film about Bobby Fischer starring Tell You Maguire. It is not that one.
Okay?
It's a film based on the kind of memoir I guess off the father, Fred, What's going whose son is a, as we will learn over the course of film, a chess prodigy and it's really about the relationship.
It's a coming of age tale about Fred and Bonnie, his parents dealing with their son's ability, and so the sun kind of got interest. Josh got interested in chess by playing in Washington Square Park,
particularly with a kind of a junkie, a hustling player called Vinny, played by Laurence Fishburne on DH.
He's also then coached by a kind of street strict traditionalist in structure called Bruce Panel, If any, play by Banking Z And essentially, it's Bruce's idea of getting this kid into play tournaments.
The climax of the film, which is what where looking at is the.
It's the tournament to be the national champion.
So because it's basically the storey of his tournaments. It is a coming of age storey.
It's about the influences on a child you know, particularly is represented by Vinny versus Bruce and the great line that I always love from Bonnie about, you know, making sure that Josh is decent.
But his gift is doesn't overrule his life. It's about those battles, kind of like imminent thie battle for a soul of a child like if you want to look in on those terms right that how do you maintain goodness when you're really good,
and you know, how do you be a parent to a child who is better than you will be at anything you've ever been in your life?
Yeah, on DH. The main reason why I was interested in reading this from the purposes of this upset because I still haven't seen the film. I've only read the climax of the script, and I'm very much looking forward to seeing it.
But you were like it's a chess match on. I was like, Oh, how does someone right a chess match to be exciting on the page?
Exciting, but also on the page, exciting to represent a chess match, being exciting on screen as what on DH?
Zaillian nails it. So I think you and I have two different elements of this climax that we wantto dig into a little bit. Do you want to go first?
All right. So my favourite observation from House alien rights this is actually for the most part, he avoids unfilmables.
To a very large extent, he's almost is intricately writing. How the same way that Lynne Ramsay does, writing the cinematic techniques that air goingto happen on the page.
Background Music
So the big climax of the film or the other match is Josh realising he can win the match, he can get Teo checkmate on DH panel.
Feeny his mental realises before Josh does.
Oh, that great burn. Yeah.
So suddenly you're intercutting between. Josh is a support group, including Panda Feeny, which is outside of the room and Josh in the room on them,
having imaginary conversations with each other, like in each of their minds.
Like panel Finis, talking to Josh through the screen, obviously just can't hear him.
Josh is in the match hearing, imagining what panel Feeny will be saying to him. He's stressing out.
He's imagining the board wiped of pieces and the pieces come back up.
Zaillian has just written purely what the audience can see in here.
He's avoided unfilmables for the most part in that huge climactic moment, and it's that confidence that he has in writing purely film a ble moments, which then allows him.
It gives him the freedom, and it's also because he's writing for himself as a director. He knows how this match is going to be paced, a za performance.
There are moments in the chess match where he basically accelerates time, and it's not move for move.
It's not this interplay between the characters, it sze the match happening quickly, and the way that he describes those points in the match are just sublime because he describes them very cinematically.
If Po we're confident before he now feels invincible. Chasing Josh is Queen Lis. Retreating Army. So consumed is hay with his marauding, though he leaves his queen momentarily and protected and Josh topples.
In that moment, there may have been 18 moves, but we're not going blow by blow. We're going by how it feels and how it's paste.
It's four lines, as opposed Teo. The final 16 moves take five foot and pages.
Then, once that Josh has toppled Po's queen and the tide has turned, we go into another compressed moment on the page.
Background Music
Tight on the chessboard from directly above moving slowly up, the platform is revealed and the combatants at it and higher players.
Other tables and higher. Still, Thie entire room, all 200 chequered boards and the 400 kids at um,
close on Josh's camp in the lobby, together now and still as a tableau facing wanted her tight on the time clock on the number one table, the seconds ticking away,
close on, Josh face straining, eyes darting from piece to piece wide on the room.
Some vacancies thie other tables. Now some kids in the lobby finished with their games, watching the monitors tight on a huge white bishop sliding diagonally high above the playing room.
More tables unaccompanied close on, Fred nervously watching and wanted her tight on a black rook, sliding horizontally close on. Bonnie, staring up at a monitor.
Really to me. This is not just an example of unfilmables because a lot of this particular stretch is very is talking about techniques is talking about shots. It's almost Ah, montage, but really, it's aliens use of white space.
That is just incredible because he's turned.
It feels like you're watching the movie. He's writing the experience of it, even though he's often going exactly by techniques.
And I think the marvel that I get from reading the script is,
his ability to know how many words to use in a line and when to use a four line paragraph and when to use a one line paragraph on When to Cut and when to compress time and expand Time,
makes it feel like a movie on the final one that I'll refer to is.
The moves of quick as the players lower each other into a speed game, attacking with increasing and unnerving violence. Another night, another porn.
Yeah, it's Zeus full of this in terms the way it describes.
I know it's on the specific examples, and we can always cut it.
But like early on when we meet Vinny, who's the other shoe to the street hustler?
This's how describes Vinnie playing chess. But this is also a character introduction for Vinnie, right?
This is his personality, because Thegame is about, as I said, the battle of his soul between these two worldviews cerebral Graeme of chess, as Vinnie plays it, more resembles pinball.
His pieces challenge the other man's joust ambush plunge off the river of the table to the ground like it's describing the feeling.
Yes, it's not exactly move by move or shot by shot what you're seeing, It's the feeling off that moment.
And this is an important one because context is important and this is this's from what, As I said way earlier, this is the first time Josh is playing a game at all.
Background Music
Zilber topples Josh's porn with the bishop, Josh forays through the forest with his queen Bonnie. Amazed, the Josh knows how to correctly move the pieces, stares at her son like he might belong to somebody else.
Zilber catches a night. Josh gangs up on a rook with his queen and a bishop.
Zilber slips away, but not before I ng briefly and suspiciously this small boy sitting across from him at the next table, many smiles to himself.
I'll just read the short inn beds. So Zilber captures the night Josh games up on a rock with his queen and a bishop. Zilber slips away, right, and then the button on the scene is vey looking to his mum and says.
Wait Skin. I'm gonna watch out for you. Josh. Wait. Skin. At least part is I used to watch you play in the park like Bobby Fischer used to show him this. Your boy used pieces in combination to attack lady.
So we actually have the dialogue connecting to the description right off how this kid place. This is how good the writing is, right, like it's all unified.
Going back to Julio's point. Context is everything. Those moments that I've highlighted are three sections from a 15 page sequence where every other moment is film a ble.
It's they work. In contrast, they work because suddenly you feel the pace accelerating. They work not because every single paragraph is an unfilmables, so going back to Helios point context is key.
I think you've done a great job talking about the way he describes Chest because it's writing the feeling right there.
Are they unfilmables I don't even know at this point. How do you write moments of all you write the feeling You right, the experience, But I'm actually interested in how he's been riding performance.
So the opening of the kind of when they get to Chicago to the national show Elastic Chest skull, actual lasting Scholastic chess championships,
is Josh and his dad have kind of gone away to spend some time because they thought chess was too much and Josh catches up with his friend Morgan.
Interior Hotel lobby Day a clerk calls out room numbers to a bellboy as she hands Fred and Vinny Keys and an uneasy smile clerk. Welcome to Chicago.
Across the lobby car, Lev quizzes Morgan on obscure openings from a Russian chair. Six. I copied. Eah, Josh.
Hi, Morgan Morgan. Josh. Where you been?
Jewish fishing. He pulls out a snapshot of himself and his dad on a dock, posing with a big fish and hands it to his friend Morgan. Well, look at this. He shows the picture to his dad, who stares at a dumb Lee Josh.
No chess boards, no chess books. I wasn't allowed to even talk about chess. Just fish for two weeks.
Two. Car live. It was my dad's idea.
Colour of nods. Absently, as the boys huddled to admire the picture more closely, Fred wanders over car, live fishing.
Fred shrugs. Not at all. Sure. It was a wise move, taking Josh fishing before the biggest tournament of his life.
Talk about an exposition, A ll line, but it works because it's the It's a performance beat.
Forman speeds.
It's a button on a scene. We know that Josh is taking him fishing right.
It's communicating how that line should land.
That whole scene should play as Fred is being kind of reckless and that there's been previous discussion about it, right?
And so the script is reminding us.
It's kind of instructing us to make but telling us what the feeling is to make sure that it lands.
So when Fred Shrugs were like, Oh, yeah, he's not sure it was the smarter, like fishing is like Is that a good idea? And you're laughing?
But that's what makes it work, right?
And there's another couple of performance. Bates of highlighted a few in the scripts like It's all conceptual clarification.
So Fred talks to a woman that in the script is described as 82nd mother because Josh is playing a girl. Rain 82nd and this is a great script joke.
This is for the reader, but it's also for the actor, which is when you described as the 82nd Mother.
We never going to know her name But her personality is defined by the fact that she is the mother to a kid that is on ly rate 82nd in you, the United States of America, which is obviously pretty awful, apparently.
Better than us.
Her pleasant manner and healthy outlook on winning and losing reminds him of his own. Long ago. Very long ago. Fred. I guess that's true. He excuses himself to escape from the woman or himself.
Right, so this is a moment again clarifying the beat.
But in the context that we've seen it, the performance writing is so good is this great scene with Josh and V.
Josh. The better I play, the better I have to play. Vinnie. That's the way it works, Josh. When will it end? Vinnie? Tomorrow. Josh wishes tomorrow we're already behind him.
It's calling its linking to script its performance beat, but it works because the line contextualised is itself.
Does that make sense? This idea that the line creates Conceptualise is the same. But even John tomorrow, John wishes tomorrow, Roy behind him, right women and tomorrow Don like it's linking like just on a pupil language thing.
Contextualised is the scene.
It's linking itself conceptually.
It's like that idea when it describes Josh teaming up with two pieces to attack another player.
And then Vinnie says he used pieces in combination to attack.
It feels integrated because it's creating the line is creating context.
The joke about fishing makes sense because we've seen the photo of the fish.
The father then says fishing, and then Fred shrugs because he's not sure that taking his son fishing was a good idea.
It actually creates its own context.
So I guess this's weird thing, and it's kind of more about writing style than unfilmables. But it's specifically away to how to get away with some of these unfilmables.
It's this idea of creating links, using the same word, the same rhythm.
It kind of creates that feeling of cinema because it's it's connecting these moments together, right?
The tomorrow line works tomorrow. They're the repetition of the words.
This is something that we talked briefly about in our dialogue episode, this idea that you know, you know, tomorrow tomorrow like the rhythm.
But you can connect the ideas.
A dialogue example is when can I think those Poe moos and then anyway, singing on the monitor panel, if any, whispers to himself.
It's the repetition of the word mistake, right?
So that kind of creates his link. And I think they've talked about this in in script nights as well, right on DH, part of the whole Josh polyphony.
Intercutting is the repetition in order. I make the repetition of certain words the way they connect, the way they link there, this chain of events, right chain of words.
But you could do the same thing in your big.
I mean it just preceding the mistake when the mistake actually happens. Joshua's reaction is Josh's body stiffens a little comma, sensing that the end is near comma for one of Tha Mme.
And obviously the second part of that sentence him stiffening.
You don't know how that's going to come across to the audience. It's him realising something.
But it's not clear yet that Josh realises the end is near for one of them, But he doesn't is not that him not sensing the win or not, that becomes clearer later when they're having the imaginary conversation with each other.
Yet? Yes, and that's important because that context is everything.
He does something, Feeny says. That was a mistake. We see a shot.
And so that clarifies the move. It's the dialogue actually telling us that that move that we don't understand because we're not amazing chess players was a mistake. So it's exposition, but it's done.
And then it links into Fred saying What was a mistake? Who made the mistake?
You know, and that again and clarification. This is very integrated riding.
And so the end of the intercutting of Josh pound off any is this? And this is kind of the example off how the performance be works makes it running. Feels so beautiful, I think, which is titled Powell. If any.
Josh voice over, I can't see it, Hanafin. Don't move until you see it.
There's this repetition of See it next scene close on, just straining to see it. Pattern after pattern.
Panathenian don't move until you see it.
He can't see it, and it's killing him, right?
So I think the observation in general about this writing style is that it feels cinematic because it understands how meaning is created on screen right through editing.
You know I can't see it. Don't move until you see it dash close on, Josh straining to see it, Josh sucks in a long breath of air to keep from suffocating. Lobby penned. Afeni breathes again, right?
So it's intercutting. It's connecting these ideas editorially.
It's actually working a sequence of images that build meaning together.
And it's what I was saying before about how he's very much using unfilmables but also very aware of how the edit is goingto work, how the cinematic techniques air going toe work, which shots he's going to use.
So it goes from being almost like Mamet level only what you can see drama, drama drama,
to then having it allows him to know when to convey to the reader but also to the crew, the meaning of the moment, the meaning of the performance.
How you get into it and how you get into it. So, for example, this is the moments of all right, so this is the performance. But it's kind of lame into this, you know you got.
But if any looking at the pieces a za voice over while Josh looks is it and paedophilia says here, I'll make it easier for you.
We flash back to Palo Feeny, raking all the pieces from the board. We cut back to Josh.
The board, empty now just stares at constructing and reconstructing, building the moves without the distraction of the pieces.
He's mine, visualising the progression of Lou's ending in it shows in his mind. Dot, dot, dot mate.
That's a performance, Pete. But then it's clarified. We connected with cut to a smile slowly across his belt. Oh, Phineas face pal Tony. He's got it, Fred, He's got it.
How do you know him? He's got it. Listen to the repetition. That rhythm benefiting. He's got it cut to Josh glances up a tpo who stare back into him with disdaining the patients what that is a constructive piece of meaning built from the understanding ofthe cinema and how similar works,
meaning is constructed from fucking images, Right?
Josh doesn't answer. He just keeps looking at the boy. So we've got all this information, and that's what made those unfilmables work because they're like a sandwich technique, but a being and flowing. It's like the multi layered.
It's beyond a sandwich. It's like links in this chain, right?
Yeah.
And so that means that those moments of clarity and I'm going to end on how the film ends, link right and that the links of meaning build something greater.
So I'm not going to give it away because you should just watch it.
Hey.
So Josh turns to his dad frame and says, I tried to give him a way out.
Fred says, I know action line and he's proud of him for it.
Raised him to be decent.
Raising to be decent. But just think of the choice off. I know big print, and he's proud of him for it.
Stevens made zillions, made a conscious decision to link the big print to the dialogue by using, and there is a version of that afraid. I know he's proud of him for it.
It's not Fred, I know, and he's proud of him for it.
It's the language in the riding itself. The way it's constructed on the micro and the macro level is constantly into leaving itself.
It's creating meaning and referencing self, and it's kind of self contextualising like I mean, that's such a subtle choice. But it is a choice.
Yeah, using. And instead of hey.
And it does the whole way through it. You know, that's what makes this so amazing.
Obviously we'll summarise our key learnings at the end, but everything he's doing every time he uses an unfilmables, it's for efficiency. It's to convey meaning.
And it's contextualised always. And the additional element that you've identified is that Zaillian is such a good writer that it is self contextualising through his language.
Here's the language, and his big print connects it.
Pendel Finney, voiceover Don't move on to see it in the dialogue in the way the diary was written.
Don't move until you see it dash line he can't see and it's killing him.
The dash is linking the dialogue to the performance Pete.
It's making it feel seamless.
It's not dried, it's not disconnected. It's just a effortless piece of writing. But he's making very conscious choices off how we construct his sentences and referencing language to create the context,
in terms of just words on the page, as well as where he's using those unfilmables in the context of the entire scene.
I think I want to be surprised if we start seeing this stuff on a certain level in the invitation.
Quite possibly so. Nice segue way. Thank you, Sue.
After we've exhausted how much we love, I'm really looking forward to watching the film. But this script was a delightful read.
But the next example that we're looking for is thie invitation by Hamza Man Freddie, which was subsequently directed by car in Kasama, Miss.
I butchered her name. Last time I said it threatened Karen, but every time I've heard her own husband pronounce the name its current, so I'm goingto roll with that.
Chas fisher over there Overcompensate. Kind of hard to call everybody up out of the blue of two years.
So glad you gotta talk about so much to celebrate tonight Way. Feel that it's important to be on that journey with the people you love.
The invitation is a very contained film set in the Hollywood Hills that the protagonist is.
Will a man who tragically lost his son just in a backyard party accident on DH.
We now meet him. Years after his son's death, He and Eden, the mother on DH ex wife, have separated,
and Eden and her new partner, David, has invited Will as well as a ll their old group of friends back too.
Eden's house, which is the house that will formally lived in with their deceased son.
And while they're having this family dinner, Eden and her new partner, David, seem a bit creepy.
They have invited guests that no one knows, and it turns out that they're members of a cult who spoilers want to kill everyone at the party.
But it's a wonderful psychological horror where Will is obviously reliving his son's death.
He's reliving happy memories off his former married and family man life, and so the script.
Until it reveals to the audience that that there is something sinister going on.
There's this wonderful sort of psychological interplay where the other the mutual friends keep telling will to calm down, that he's freaking out and depending how it shock because I still haven't seen it. I only read.
I started reading a page one and just smash the whole script because it's so well written in such an easy read.
But for the longest time, the writers don't actually reveal whether there's anything wrong or not.
Obviously, it's told from Will's point of view, so is the audience. You can feel something well, strong on DH while we're focusing on one sequence, which is in the middle of the film, where it's kind of, Ah, midpoint where it turns.
And I think one of the interesting observations I want to make early on is the front half of the script is very unfilmables heavy.
Where is the back half of the script? It's all plot, plot, plot, action, action, action.
There's almost no unfilmables because the meaning has suddenly become clear.
They tone of it has become clear, and so at the front half there, wanting to make sure that even though there's this plot uncertainty and these characters have different experiences of what's going on,
they want to make absolutely sure that the reader of the script is feeling the way they want you to feel,
so before we dive into the actual sequence.
There's just a couple of moments I want to call out in the first five or six pages of the script that I just think unbelievably great, judicious use of unfilmables to explain how something is feeling.
So, like I said, their son Ty, he died in the backyard, and it opens with the empty, deserted backyard.
And all you're doing is hearing the memory flashback off the party, and the way that they describe it is.
There are no people present, just the sound of a party from some time ago, the voice is strained through someone's memory.
Now the voices strained through someone's memory is that thing that we were talking about specifically universal.
You don't know exactly how that sounds, but it is something that you can imagine.
And it is something that you can communicate to a sound designer and then the other one that I wanted talk about is there.
Will and his new partner, Kira, are driving to the house and its description of the road.
The car moves up the narrow road in the hills, headlights glinting off parked cars. Everything seems precarious, somehow dark and twisted.
Now they're not describing sharp, jagged branches or an eerie tone.
It's again, specifically universal. They're saying how they want the design, the lighting, the camera work, the actors, performances, thie editing to feel rather than telling you exactly,
what you're seeing.
It's the opposite of instructional.
Those are just that that's in the openings, like some amazing use of unfilmables.
All of it is about establishing the overall tone for this film, which is, it is unsettling from being. It is, in many ways, a psychological horror film. We're not quite sure how to go.
It is the opposite of a hereditary. They've using language they're using.
The universally in specific just threw out. We did throughout this, you know, just the way, describes Thie character.
You know, there's something unsettling about her energy skittish and abused animal.
It's using thie imagery of the language. If that makes sense,
the imagery that is using crisis unsettling feeling, which is important, which is telling the crew and the reader,
and eventually the audience, because it's about community. The feeling that this should be an unsettling opening, it seems to him, unnaturally long a trial.
The choice of language throughout this is beautiful control overtone.
I mean that that what you're just describing is a hallway they are describing Ah, hallway as a trial.
Now they could say something like, you know, the train spotting moment where he lies down and he sinks into the floor.
Or they could say, This is a vertigo push pull. They could talk about exactly what you're seeing, but instead they're talking about how the character feels.
Yeah, and this is kind of so far. The big takeaways from these two episodes for me is I need to put a little bit more of that into my riding. I think I can be a little bit dry.
I think I'm probably a little bit more guilty of the instructional side, partly because I want to make sure the drama's working in terms of action. But I think some of my writing can be dry, and I think this kind of,
tonal control putting you in the experience of the character will help used judiciously.
Yeah, and that's like we've highlighted for examples.
But those four examples are occurring in the 1st 27 pages,
so I've highlighted for gloriously in specific universal tonal unfilmables in 27 pages off pure film rumbles.
They're using them very judiciously. But anyway, so the main sequence that in terms of, you know, we were looking for or inspiring sequences the midpoint of the film.
And it is 123 for four pages on This is a shift.
Almost every single line off the script is unfilmables.
It's all about tone. It's all about feeling. But by doing that, because it's in such contrast to everything that's happened before, it's actually telling you how it's going to feel.
And it's just glorious writing. So they've had.
They know now that Eden and David, the hosts of the party, are members of a cult, Will has had some uncomfortable moments and has been confronted with house.
He's seen some things that he's very suspicious off, but no one else is suspicious.
A lot of their mutual friends, a very blase about this cult like, Can I be invited?
I've heard that did great things for so and so, but now is a dinner and overdue you, Carisa.
Background Music
A feast. Eden did a reserved as we close in on Will and we begin a montage in hallway, we creep through a darkened part of the house and eggs or a ble. Voices are audible ahead.
We, appearing into rooms in tow, have open doors drifting, moving on toward the light and sound.
We watch from above the conversations in the warm pool of light of the dinner table, a droning sound insistent begins at the table.
We wash in and out of conversations the night getting into its groove. Food passed back and forth. Laughter will last, too, but it's still having a hard time trying to connect but a step behind.
We're deeply in his point of view.
There is something about the way people are tearing at their meat, something primal.
There is something mechanical about the conversations, the seams and gaps revealed. There is something grotesque about all of it.
Well, looks across to Ben watches as laughing. He tips back his wine glass, raising his eyebrows, a flash remembering the same gesture.
Ben. Lighter, younger, So much has changed.
At the table, we washed back into the conversation. More wine has come out more drugs well, looks to carer the way she moves her hands, a flesh the past somewhere else, the same gesture.
She looks at him, expectant, open at the table, her expression very different.
Darker in the hallway, we move closer and closer to the sounds of the conversation.
We creep toward it like an animal curious. Approaching a campfire at the table will seize Gina, Looking at the empty seat where Choi should pay, Keira puts down her glass, looking intently into it for a moment.
Then, up at the table, we close in on Will's face, a shot of the backyard in the daytime, a child's birthday party, adults talking tie.
His son and another boy a little bit older, are playing rough housing a little bit at the table.
The droning sound is louder and louder, but people around him seemingly slower and faster all at once.
He looks to Karen, the only one who seems riel.
She is not looking at him. He watches her. He says her name. She doesn't hear him, doesn't look over at him.
She looks closed to him like a person he doesn't know.
The backyard will runs pushing through people.
Thie older boy is crying. He holds an alum Minion Baseball bat Will. What did you do? What did you do?
Eden is on her knees in front of wth. Um, she screams at the table.
Will's face. The sound of the conversation rises into a cacophony.
Cut to silence. Will sits in the hallway as if startled to be there.
He looks back. People are clearing plates from the table off to himself. He rubs his palms into his eyes, trying to get himself back together.
He hears something water running in the bathroom. He gets up drawn toward the sound.
So one observation I want to make a small one.
Is that rope in line off this script, as you would have heard uses a week, and there's a few wees washed through the 1st 30 pages, right?
Just remind, you know, that horror thing that we talked about that reminding, you know, off the voyeurism, I guess of the camera. And then you get this sequence.
You know, this is what's interesting about it is there's a shift in the type of way it's still got that that kind of unsettling use of language, but the wee makes us more complicit in it, right?
We closing on well, and we begin, and it's more instructional, you know, in terms of the way it's shot.
Yes, but it's also, I mean, I love like you said the unsettling language.
But it's also in the same way that searching for Bobby Fischer does. It compresses time.
So I I'm interested to see the actual film because there's whole sections of big print, as you will have heard where the conversation is still going on. So characters air talking and we're seeing that.
But all that we're getting in there script is a description off how it feels.
There's something mechanical about the conversations, the seams and the gaps revealed. There is something grotesque about all of it will be fascinating to see whether they've successfully conveyed that, but they probably have through the droning sound insistent.
So coming to this idea of being self contextualising.
Making it feel integrated, right? That's kind of what we're talking about. How does these things kind of like We're deliberately shifting language style of writing, but it needs. So it needs to feel the different while also feeling integrated.
But a Zay was trying to say that I'm hawking it to the beginning, that there has already been used a bit of use of the way.
There is also naturally rhythm in the big print. There is something about the way people are tearing at their meat, something primal.
There is something mechanical about the conversations, the seams in the gaps.
There is something grotesque about all of it that is kind of quote unquote and unfilmables like. It's not telling us exactly what we feeling, but it feels integrated quite simply because of the repetition off. There is some link.
There is something There is something that integrates it. It makes it feel like a unit of meaning.
And, you know, even the repetition of the week lows In we creep, we watch we you know,
the emphasis on the we not only does it makes a male Fillmore voyeuristic, but integrate like it makes it feel off a piece because we know the point of view off.
This sequence is shifted, so we're Mohr aligned in with will. That's but also understands cinema.
We close in on will and then we do this.
And so at this point is spreading the context that we, as the audience are experiencing it with will kind of alliances with him puts it inside his point of view. Does that make does not make sense?
Absolutely.
And there's like we wash in and out of conversations. Later on, we washed back into the conversations.
It's actually using repetition as a conscious choice to make it feel integrated.
Don't even make it feel integrated to integrate it. That is what repetition is. We move closer and closer the sounds of the conversation. We creep towards it like an animal.
We've already heard animal in this sequence. We've already create further. We've already got. We move closer.
It's reusing the same phrases judiciously enough so it doesn't feel repetitive, but so it feels like a unified sequence.
And I mean so the problem with this observation it's no problem. It's an accurate observation is the same one we get from searching for Bobby Fischer is It's incredible writing.
But the things that we can identify as a craft tool is where we've got like, three pages of unfilmables is that they've made a deliberate decision to shift the writing style.
And as you've identified and as I think, I really like Julio is phrase like they haven't broken the spell.
You haven't broken the spell is kind of like such a weird negative. It's like identifying their things that they've done. Do not break the spell.
Yes. So what have they done to do that? And I think you made one really good observation is their use of way,
on the use of repetition in language, but I still go back to They are talking about the feeling that they're wanting to convey.
Absolutely. They're writing the experience. I'm just trying to get down to brass tacks.
You know, the kind of actual shoe leather of how you write this stuff and you know me pointing it out isn't that I mean, that you can people of doing it, but it's something could be thoughtful about.
So this's such a weird analogy, but you just got to go with me on this.
So there is this thing to do with tagging like data sets, particularly with imagery about what he called a key word vocabulary.
So just say your cattle in a whole bunch of as I am. I'm working through like, 12 hours of footage to edit, and I kind of have to come with a very limited set of key words to go.
This is scenery, but this is scenery. Siri, this is scenery blood.
This is people like a very narrow band of words to describe the images because I can't sit there, and once it's pointless, if I go actually into too much detail and be, too,
to being too specific with that kind of key. Word would mean it's actually pointless, right?
I might as well have every single shot in its own folder, which makes it going to make it hard.
So group ideas together, right?
And by using a certain kind of when we're talking about the image imagery used in dialogue but also the kind of imagery and the word choice used in big print vocabulary like creep.
Animal cacophony, it's actually restricting the palette of language that you use to suit the tone of the script, and that's going to help make it feel like this's the same spell.
One. The language itself has power, but to their choosing toe limit the vocabulary.
There is actually something that's powerful in that I'm sure if you run it through one of those word analysis programmes or maybe like I could be, you know, it's really into the language of this person.
You can go to an extreme. I love David Foster Wallace, and he has never met her.
He never met a word that he couldn't look up a far more complicated word to use right because he was about the precision like that became a defining part of his style was that very broad vocabulary.
So it's actually being conscious in your choice of vocabulary.
And think of the language that was used in searching for Bobby Fischer described chest they were describing in the attack.
Parry. You know, they were using the language of military conquest on that made the language of the chest across.
Each of the tournaments that we saw have a feel that sets the crew that these we want to shoot the chest in a particular way right, But it unifies it and keeps it integrated.
Does that create the feeling of Or potentially there's an understanding of how cinema works,
that is in searching for Bobby Fischer, which is that kind of you feel the intensity and the rhythm ofthe this speed of all this because it's written in such a way that every scene intercuts with next Sena's dashes on everything.
One character says a line here they catch another location and character finishes it right. So creates this feeling of a runaway freight train.
He understands how cinema works here. They're going for a really disorientated sense of losing time, and they trying to rebel and they're replicating on the page. We wash in and out wash. What a great word for this, right?
You know the elongated vow of the hour with soft constant of the, you know, wash.
It gives that feeling when we read it of how it should be communicated. But this is absolute mastery of control of language, but that's how it makes it work.
But it's also awareness of camera. You know, they are very conscious of where the camera is and informing the reader where the camera is,
so that as you are reading this beautiful language and these wonderful unfilmables, you are also very aware of exactly what the cameras capturing at any time on. That's the same as searching for Bobby Fischer.
They're not just relying on unfilmables, even though they've clearly ramped it up in this sequence, too.
Create that cinematic feeling.
And I think what's interesting about washes? It's such a great word, but I can actually see how a camera can do that. And editing can do that right.
Each directors directors will have different interpretations, and so you might see it differently from how I will see it.
But it feels cinematic.
I mean, they even say at one point, as Chris is read, we are deeply in his point of view, they are telling us how we are feeling at this time.
And you know the power of it isn't just the contrast of this language, but the cinematic picture. It's playing in your mind. This is the button on the the sequence will face. The sound of the conversation rises into a cacophony. Cut too.
Silence. One word in capitals. No full stop. It's our own wine.
Well sits in the hallway as if startled to be. They're the cutest importance. It's like, Why do you use the cut to? You? Could've just gone.
Conversation rises into a cacophony. Silence!
It's a conscious choice for big print to emphasise the silence because you can feel that crescendo into a company you know, into cacophony and silence that inflexion.
But I just put in there is what the cuts who was doing visually.
It actually is making sure that when you look at the page, it's actually got like double spacing between cacophony in silence.
This's mastery of command of the pay.
And it's also ending the montage without having to say and montage.
Yeah, exactly. We kind of have him because I'm pretty sure I've read that in the script of one point.
What and montage. I do it every time I start. If I feel compelled to write started montage, I feel compelled to write End of montage somewhere.
And what's interesting is what this is actually challenging you to do. Is how cinematically will you end that montage?
Is it just going to fade, or is it going to be a harsh cuts, silence and therefore, you know, need.
You don't need to say in montage, because it's communicating the idea in cinematic terms.
I feel it's interesting that they even felt the need to say Start a montage, but they did it in a really delightful way.
We close in on Will and we begin a new line montage. New line in the Hallway, New Line. We creep through the dark and part of the house, like there, still inviting you to be the camera inviting you.
They're using unfilmables to actually create a more accurate on unfilmables experience.
One final observation to make, which is just given that this is a episode on words on the page.
I mean, you should just read this stuff, but there is flashbacks. There's two flashbacks, maybe three in this little sequence for three, they don't use new sluglines.
They don't go exterior, you know, blow up. But they don't break the spell.
Then actually, don't break the spell because they don't use a new slugline. They just use a flash.
Remembering the same gesture, they use the Tallix to achieve the same thing.
You know, a shot of the backyard capitalised in italics, but not a slug in the daytime.
A child's birthday party Later on, italics. They don't say a flash because they've now, by the third thing established that putting stuff in italics in within this sequence is a flashback. In fact, they've done it by the second.
They only do a flash in the 1st 1 and then it's a metallics.
The backyard will runs pushing through people, and it's actually a line of dialogue. It's a little bit of a longer scene, all in italics and then back to at the table.
They haven't broken the spell because they haven't actually used proper seeing headings.
So this feels like a part of sequence, Yes, and that's a conscious choice.
It feels like it's washing.
But these are the kind of things that look, you know, maybe going to get annoy Julio because he's like, Well, maybe you should just use seen things if you don't know any better and it's like if you don't know anybody going Tio aren't going to be writing great ship, right?
Part of me feels that this episode, the benefit our listeners are going to get, is just listening to caress a readout. Amazing screenplays and you're my analysis. They could pretty much skip through the chapters for.
The point is it screenplay is deliberately to not break the spell avoided the use of scene headings, which is something that you would be encouraged to do because how it's a new location is a new scene.
And yet when it comes time to do a shooting script, does your strip boarding and you're putting a location right?
But doing at this point is going is going toe.
Pull people out, and the fact is seen headings are there for scheduling and budgeting, right?
Let's not over think it right.
People forget that they are there there. There were elements of this that our screenplay er's and we'll talk about this more in the follow up episode that are functional.
Scene headings are functional here they're making sure that you feel it like the experience and running in the functional information off it is actually going to take away for.
So new light.
This is one of those beautiful script that does exactly what we needed to do.
Because the film is very cinematic. The film is loaded with emotion and, loaded with feeling on the script, immaculately captures exactly what the experience of watching the film is like.
So Sue, you picked the moment. Do you want to summarise the film for those poor suckers who haven't yet seen moonlight?
Written by Barry Jenkins, based on In the Moonlight. Black Boys Look Blue by Tarell Alvin McCraney.
Which is a play and was unpublished international. Larry learns about it. Maybe they actually staged it.
From interviews I think they have.
Yeah, and so is this not a published play? But it's a stage, all right, So it's another coming of age film, and it's three stages in the life of the main character,
which is his youth, adolescence and early adult life.
And it kind of is about thie difficulty. It's coming an age storey that both in terms of his sexuality and his identity, particularly like his feeling about whether he falls into criminality or not.
It's very it's very gentle, like there is definitely each storey, like little Sharon and black, and it's interesting that he has got different names in different stages of his life.
They definitely all in terms of sequences. There's kind of like a very loose character or plot questions, each. They kind of self contained, right?
So what's important is that there was a boy that he had a sexual experience with called Kevin.
In the second self contained Storey as a teenager.
Yes, yet, and he we kind of jump forward.
So when he's now black, he's released going by. The nickname Action Ron is released in prison, is doing drugs, and he decides to go on reunite with Kevin, who works at a diner.
So it's important to note that he is dealing drugs because his mother was a drug addict, and the first sequence of him as a little boy was him forming like a father son relationship with a man played by Muha,
Ali, who ends up like little, discovers that this man was his mother's drug dealer and is actually the man.
Even though he's formed this intense attachment to this man and this love for him, he realises that he is, in fact, the cause of everything that's wrong with his life.
And yet we find out now is a jump to an adult because in the middle sequence, after having the sexual experience with Kevin, it ends up with,
car on assaulting Kevin at high school, egged on by his by his peers.
And it's kind of unclear whether that's self hating, acting out at Kevin or just trying to fit in with his peers.
Yeah, with him because there's definitely even right back when he was little. This implication that there is an awareness that Shiran is gay.
And there's this great line about when one the drug dealer, little asking, what faggot means and one saysit's a word used to make gay people feel bad.
What's so? Thank it.
It is.
Ah. Word used to make gay people feel bad.
Thank you.
You could be gay, but, you know, everybody calling or fame.
So there's this implication very early on that there is an awareness of it.
And so the whole Shire on the tension of the strike that the sequence was sure and this is important is that get the hazing ritual,
against Kevin is as much about people him wanting acceptance from that social group in him, repressing his sexuality, you know,
on DH that leads him to Juvenile Hall, and then So when we jumped forward, it's kind of like we filled in the gaps that by going into that system, he's become a delinquent.
But obviously he has never quite forgotten cabin.
Yeah, and all throughout this film, there's this wonderful cinematic moments where you know, music soars or the feeling like in the first sequence it's the drug dealer teaching him how to swim in the ocean.
And then in the second sequence, it is the sexual experience.
And I think we'll probably get Krista to read out both the sexual experience and act, too.
And then the final climax of the movie and how it's described because it's important again.
Teo Identify. Yes, there's amazing use of unfilmables, but they are judicious use of unfilmables.
This is the Chyron sequence. He's followed Kevin down to the Jews.
Background Music
Slowly, nearly subconsciously, Ciaran, going weak leans toward Kevin, their weight supporting one another here on the tune all sound drowned by the echoing ocean the night covering these two as close as they've ever been.
Both sit up again facing each other and still close noses nearly touching, they stare. These waters have never charted the culmination of invitations they've been sending since Day one.
In that beautiful sequence, everything is suitable until it's like the what you described the sandwich technique again.
Everything is suitable perfectly. Film a ble until they put the button on it, which is the meaning.
These are the waters they've never charted, the culmination of invitations they've been sending since day one.
We don't know that, but it's what the It certainly affects the actors but is not necessarily for the audience other than that is what the meaning and the feeling that the filmmakers want to impart on the audience.
At that particular moment of time. And if you do your job with music and sound and lighting, you will understand that in that moment that they stare that they are going into somewhere. That's probably a little beautiful boat, and I think that is what it's about.
And it is I'm going to use because they talked about at the beginning. It's on a sandwich. It's it's that me being most affected. It's the punch line, but not in a funny sense.
Yeah, like what saves alien dead in searching for Bobby Fischer.
The scripts are full of this stuff to suitable stuff, interwoven with meaning and feel.
So this was sent to us by various people when we put out a call for examples. But it was also one selected by you, which is essentially the climax of the whole film.
Everything that we've seen. So as you said, Black and Kevin have reunited after everything. Blacks, Now an adult, he's a drug dealer himself. He's obviously he's repressed that part of his sexuality.
He's painfully visited his mother in rehab, refusing her outreach for forgiveness.
And then there's this moment.
You got a name?
Nothing from black. Nothing. No words. My gestures, Nothing rendered from him. In this moment, Black should be driving. Should have his eyes on the road paying attention to the other cars. The things passed instead.
All eyes on Kevin staring back at the man lost in that question the space between its posing and thiss beat thie. Clear answer.
Kevin looks away at the window again. The earth just moved. They both felt it, Kevin. Reaching for the DIA ll raises the volume on that sound system.
A moment of thiss travel Purple haze enveloping them in this unspoken pact for a beat.
So a few observations because I think when this was first, this particular scene was first brought to my attention.
By the end of the broadcast moonlight, she'll never listen. Corey Jen was like, In fact, this is right.
This is writing like who says you can't write like this? Read it and having now done this stuff, I'm looking at them like it is doing its interweaving, suitable stuff with explanations.
It's not like the previous scene where it's a whole bunch of suitable stuff and a button.
It's interweaving the observation, the meaning, meaning up. Nothing we're going to state from, like nothing from black.
That's what it could be. But then it's like nothing, no words nor gestures, nothing and emphasis on nothing, nothing, nothing feeling integrated.
So the pros itself was making it feel like it's part of it.
And given that there's a whole thing about him being silent when he rocks up to see Kevin and him being very like a man of few words,
you can shoot seeing him that but it's giving us the meaning and giving us the feel while grounding it in a visual.
Yes, as you say it's interweaving between was film a bull on what's unfilmables, but also I just want to give everyone the script context, which is This is not how the whole script has written like in the invitation.
There's been a shift into this style, this more poetic style of writing, so that,
it makes the reader feel what it would be like to be watching the movie that it emotionally feels more poetic.
The white space stretches out, time stretches out.
You're in this moment feeling it.
And you know you can get This is seen 95 page 92.
It's late into the movie. He get away with this and this moment you don't get the specifics of this. But you know where you're going to stay in tonight.
It's so loaded when Kevin asks, right, The whole context of their relationship him and and this is important context is key.
You can get away with this in this writing because that question is this some the culmination of 90 minutes of this character, right?
If this was on page 2 92 it would have felt very different.
And yet they're still grounding and stuff. It's suitable, you know. He's looking at Kevin instead of on the road.
Kevin looks away. You can break down the action, Kevin. Reaching for the DIA ll raising the volume.
But it's giving you a ll that because it's that line from Peter.
We talk about witness when he cut all this dialogue from witness because he was like, there is this great moment between Harris and 14 Kelly McGinnis in witness when they're kind of looking at each other and there's pages and pages of dialogue and Peter Weir's like That's really important for us to all understand that.
But if I do my job properly, hopefully we don't need any of the dialogue at all.
This is a similar thing, which is all this writing is in there to communicate that meaning and that idea. But hopefully they do all their job previously.
You don't need any of the actual explanation. You just need the actions that the stillness of that moment, the performance and the music will all line up to communicate. I think it does that idea.
I've staring back at the man lost in that question, a space between its posing and this beat the clear answer that is actually fucking suitable.
And then it's completely either because that we're going to stay tonight is so loaded and all that history comes to bear.
But it's only suitable because of everything that's gone before it.
Tio repeat hauliers point context is key, and that scene that we've picked out the most beautiful piece of writing and the whole script.
But the scene carries on, and Kevin keeps on trying to find out who black is, and they go back and forth and going back to our dialogue episode.
Kevin is full of questions using a lot longer words, and you can see it when you're looking at the script.
Kevin's lines are always longer or multiple lines and black lines are just, you know, two words short.
He's trying not to give anything away, and yet he's the one who's come and found Kevin.
Always you.
For me? Yeah. You say a man in France, that car Who is you?
Black, shrugging his shoulders, smiles sheepishly.
Me and it's found me. Nothing else. Okay, so you you hard Now you say that with the n word.
A a 20. Samuel manages. I seen you in a minute. It's not what I expected.
And then finally, black hits back with a question.
What did you expect?
Kevin thinking about that? One has to ask himself, What did he expect?
You know that that is a very playable unfilmables as an actor.
Move. The last time I saw you.
At first, just a nod from black comma, a plaintive gesture from his body. But in those eyes so Muchmore.
Remember,
trying to be Oh.
A lot of this is, you know, I use that flippant phrase earlier, execution dependent And again, this is written by a writer director and in the same way that Steve Zaillian did.
It's almost like these are the writer Barry Jenkins saying to the director, Barry Jenkins, This is what you have to get.
Don't stop shooting until you get this.
Yeah, yeah. Sometimes you gotta write that stuff in, but again, this isn't a dialogue episode, but to Steven that you remember the last time I saw you remember for a long time, Tried not to remember right.
So we connecting those to sentence with you's remember and then the repetition tried not to remember, tried to forget, right? So the linking the chain of language makes a Connexion.
What's interesting in the dialogue is that is that they actually used white space a little bit, so it's hard to visualise. But this this speed of dialogue tried to forget all these times the good, the bad, all of it.
The good, dot, dot, 0.0.1 line. Then they've inserted a character return.
So then it's like dot, dot, dot, the bad new line, all of it.
We gotta visualise it. So that's been broken, too, for their putting beats into the conversation without running beat that is doing it visually.
Yes, they're keeping the spell.
I'm not they're keeping us, but But they do speak later on.
So it's interesting that they in this little exchange because ofthe who Black is and Kevin's. Yeah, I know, like it's really interesting writing because then they're choosing to put in beat, but they're trying to not break the spell.
Screenwriting.
I'm trying to think of another unfilmables in this because even though it feels like beautiful writing, because I think we actually decided we wanted to like moonlight was the first trip we decided we wanted to do out of this whole exercise.
And now coming back to it, having done everything else, context is everything. Because of stuff like the performance, writing is great like.
I never had that before.
I'm tired of hell right now. Making more money.
Hang on the words, man. Not them kind. What I had before is that really,
Bye.
Black lightning at that, a little smile. It's only amplified as Kevin starts to do a little bob and weave ad libbing. O'Meally ask him.
That's all. Add looping Amalia's when that's all suitable, that's just action.
It feels it's got a It's got voice lightning. It's giving personality to these people. The vocabulary that they've chosen to use here suggests that.
It's got voice.
But what you're pointing at is judicious use, where Barry Jenkins has decided to really push the unfilmables and not just use language in a beautiful way to use voice to write film a bles where he's pushed.
Unfilmables is in this moment of heightened emotion, where he wants the audience to feel that the Earth has just moved,
without being able to dramatise it beyond his two men driving in a car.
One of them looked at the other, and the other looked away.
Those of the actions. That's how Mamet would write it. But Barry Jenkins realised that he needed Mohr than that in that moment.
Okay, He's he does. I'm going to come into this kind of like chain and the way you stuff feels integrated. This is the kind of end coming to the end of the scene, right?
Black fixes him in his sights more directly than before. Colon.
You'd only Manus ever touched me.
Background Music
The air going out of Kevin's chest, his gaze fixated on blacks lips anticipating the words falling from their colon.
The only one.
Blacks. Hand is a flatter top of table, his eyes lowered to it. Colin.
I have everything touched anyone since.
Interesting The use, like the visual repetition, but it's connecting those ideas. They're not three separate statements.
Colin, you're the only man who's ever touched me. Colon Thie. Only one. Colon. I haven't really touched anyone since It's this building into this moment and again, understanding how cinema works. I haven't really touched anyone since cut, too.
Background Music
Black sitting at the foot of the bed, fully clothed, hands clasped between his knees, leaned over slightly, Kevin standing before him, frozen.
They hold each other's eyes and interminable beat black stands shakily.
Kevin watches him as he closes the space between them, drawing right up to him.
Kevin takes a hand and lays it flat against blacks chest.
A puzzled look coming over Kevin's face.
Kevin crosses the doorway, flips a switch, total darkness, only the soft thudding of feet across the floor, the sound of bodies touching the beginning of things. Then another sound rising from afar.
The sound of waves crashing, rushing onto shore and mingling with that rush of waves, the sound of lips and hands, the joining of bodies.
Somewhere in this darkness, Black and Kevin are relearning one another as we cut to.
Dr DOT is a harsh cut. The's Ways heard crushing moments earlier on full display.
It's reading the sound design transition, and she'll listen to our transitions episode in there. But it creates a cinematic moment.
Teo End, this is, I mean, that's what makes it beautiful riding. But he understands how cinema is put together in the language that it uses and finding China replicated on the paper.
Background Music
It's going back, Tio. My point. I made earlier, somewhat facetiously, that I think the biggest benefit we will give,
to our readers is Tio here Korisa, reading these things out and hopefully inspire our listeners to go and read these scripts because they are amazing lessons in when to use unfilmables and when to not.
And also how to integrate them with other writing style, like it's about words on the page.
The reason these guys get away with unfilmables is they understand how to write. I'm not trying to be flippant about that.
I'm actually trying. That's actually profound.
Well, they. They understand two things. They understand very much how cinema works, so they're often working with editing with camera, with white space and pacing.
So they are working with that. And then on top of that, they're also very clear on how language works on using language to give the same feeling that images will when watching the film,
repetitions of words in the same way that you know it's choosing linguistic semiotics, too.
Take the place off what will be.
Cinematic semiotics. Yeah, because there is a vocabulary with cinnamon, right?
Like you know, for those who've never produced something like, part of what you'll be doing with the cinematography is choosing your lenses your focal lengths.
There's part of that is part of the process. So we only ever shoot this actual wrists or this actor on a 40 mil lens.
And this angle, you know, can be part of it. Like we'll be meeting the vocabulary because you get unity out of being controlled or limited in terms of how you produce, like how you make something something sense.
Yeah, on DH. It's the same with performance, like they are the script air telling the performers what they need to try and hit, and it's telling the director's not to stop shooting until they get that.
So do we have any do when I kind of wrap up at this point?
I think so. I mean, I've got some definite learnings just from these examples, but I think we will do a lot. Mohr learnings once we've digested this episode and then perhaps vent sallied forth with our own work.
Yeah, well, there's stuff now, particularly I'll be interested now I'm like, Fuck, I should like all these little techniques, just like using me and from friend, and he's proud ing for it. I'm like God, some of that stuff that feels a little bit trunk to conk aided.
Maybe it's using connective tissue like that to make it feel seamless could actually elevate the riding without even changing the storey. I mean, this is it may feel like cart before the horse, but you know.
Well, it sze setting the challenge that Julio has said, Don't break the spell.
Because you might be letting your storey down. Bye.
Breaking your own spell like bad editing can ruin stuff that is actually fairly well shot.
I I've seen it like you, like me and these films being let down by the editor, not anyone else.
All the sound like Paul sound editing. And I think if you've ever seen in student films, sometimes that's it. And it's amazing what someone who knows what they're doing, how they confined tune the entrances and the exits and all that stuff to make it feel really elevated. More considered, you know?
Yes. So I was just listening to the business of the podcast, the business case Yeow podcast.
And they were interviewing Julianne Moore and Bart Freundlich on there English language remake ofthe Suzanne Beers after the wedding.
And it was interesting because they talked about going to Sundance and getting mixed reviews out of Sundance.
And then the one thing that they fixed in between that Sundance winning and then getting an actual theatrical release was just remixing the score. They didn't change the score.
They didn't change any of the edit. Theyjust remixed the score on.
That made a huge difference, but talking more about making it feel more grounded.
So even though there is non di Jerry music there to make it less prevalent in the mix, And to me, that's a fascinating part of cinema.
And that's what unfilmables Air trying to replicate, like how that school rested in the mix, changed how audiences experienced that film.
Yeah. What were particular eating here is that, at a certain point, your execution of all these elements on the micro impacts how people interpret the macro.
And hopefully you and I are at a certain level with our storytelling, not saying whether the best storytellers in the world but where we could be being held back by the language we're using on the page, right?
Yeah.
Well, well, our listeners will be able to find out for themselves next episode, whether that's the case or not, but they're too big takeaways I have from having done this particular homework,
is I was fascinated by what you've identified it, how much the writers have used repetition both in and out of the dialogue,
to not break the spell to carry the reader through those moments.
And that goes back to Helios. Context is key by repeating language or using a defined palette of language.
You are creating context even in when using unfilmables.
And then, yeah, just how we've talked about these amazing moments, these or inspiring cinematic moments where the unfilmables air just delicious. It's almost like reading a novel.
But the writers in all of those instances are very judicious with they use. They build to those moments using very,
you know, almost Mamet style sparse angle on only shoot what you can see and then change the style that they're writing in to deliver those big beats.
Because if we actually think about it and then seems obviously in hindsight, those moments of all stick out as moments of all, because they do change the language in the context of the film.
The invitation. When you watch it, I know you've only read it, but when you watch it, you really feel like you're being take transported into another moment in moonlight.
That moment in the car between them has so much weight.
And it's not just the contextual wait, but added weight of the way it's shot and lit and music.
Those are moments of all because of where they are placed in the film, right?
Like as in What Purpose? Their storey. It's serving narratively, and they where their place in the film, but also the language the cinematic language used to communicate it.
That's what we call in the moments of all because they are unusual, you know, like their remarkable in the sense of there.
They're things that were remarkable and that shift off style, however small that shift is like it's a key shift to use a music term going from major to minor or whatever is in there.
So they feeling integrated with everything else that's come before or after.
They don't feel like we're in a completely different movie, but they definitely feel that they've shifted language and replicating that on the page might mean shift in your language.
You know, either slowing it down and using a little bit more that weight space thing like in moonlight.
Or it might mean ritually changing the type of language. The emphasis on the ways etcetera in the invitation searching for Bobby Fischer is interesting because I think the moment of all when you see it is the pace at which it goes thie intercutting.
But that Inter cutting that the language that it uses cinematically is replicated on the page by Thie intercutting.
And that kind of beautiful sequence between the bank, Kinsley, Carriage and Josh is built on the page. But it's a very different style from the film elsewhere, right?
Even though so it kind of has that crescendo.
Even though the film and this is not a spoiler, few has voiceover quite early on, so that idea of getting inside of Josh's head is not weed by the end, because it's been set up at the beginning.
To put a whole Leo's anxiety arrest. None of the unfilmables that Marisa is read out are revealing plot information.
None of them are. Exposition will know the closest. There might have been a couple in searching for Bobby Fischer, which living more about relationship ships but like them, you know Fred about really shouldn't have taken his son on a fishing trip.
But that works because that is, ah, punchline, quite literally, a punchline in the Bay Age that has all this set up leading into it, right?
And then there's that mum, about the money being 82nd. But if you actually watch the film, you realise that even though there's the joke about calling her 82nd month, that she actually says, That's my daughter and she's ranked 80 seconds and then she's known as 82nd month,
you know, which is like a hit, like a levity in the actual writing of the script.
All right, well, I think if you've got any other observations about what we have talked about in this episode or in the previous episode, in the context of unfilmables but kind of broadly unfilmables instructor, Bols, for example,
I was going to keep on using it until it sticks.
Yeah.
Please write to us at ask at this one's for you, Julio, because apparently even find out frickin email address.
It's asked at draught hyphen. Zero dot com emails. There's a contact form on the website.
Find us on Twitter. Love to hear from you. We are going to try and get into some need gritty, and we are generally gonna be looking at some of our own writing.
So in my case, I've gotta script that many years ago, many years ago makes you sound really old.
A few years ago, vaguely undefined was very happily was nominated for a Monte Miller Award, the best unproduced short form screenplay for the Writers Guild.
But what's interesting is when I first and I'll give this more context. But when I first wrote it, it was very dry on. One of my friends was like, I think you need Teo.
It's all going well to say this character look through the window, but I kind of want to know what they're thinking and feeling.
And so I wrote more of that stuff. But having reread it recently because I thought about getting an audio recording of it done, I was like, I reckon I could elevate the language even more so I kind of want to,
talk through that a little bit as well as examples from other projects, and I'm working on without naming what those projects are specifically,
it was almost like you could do a pass in your own script that is purely looking at this kind of language.
And I'm. I'm working with a producer on a TV pilot at the moment where we've finally got down to the draught where all destruction or the character work and all the theme self is all done.
It's literally just about words on the page, like how things are described and he and I have very different approaches to unfilmables, and I think some of his crossing out of my unfilmables,
is absolutely spot on and some of them I strongly disagree with, so we'll talk through those.
And some I agree with the ones he cut that you didn't think you should. So that will be some fun discussion.
And lastly, I think we might even have a conversation with Theresa. Who was you've heard over the last two episodes. Has Bean reading these streets, seen excerpts? Christa's interesting because she's a She comes from a theatre background.
She's an actor, but she's also a writer because in theatre writing and acting and dramaturgy a kind of a lot more interrelated like it's like completely acceptable to being an actor.
That ends up riding right, and she kind of works between those disciplines.
So Charles and I am particularly interested in hearing her from an acting perspective,
about what she responded to good and bad in the examples that we have looked at as an actor, because I think that's also really informative, because a screenwriter's.
You and I know from experience on this public producer's going uniting our head.
Listening to this that attaching talent is actually one of the young attach a director.
You attach the act of the actors and sometimes particularly with the stuff at the level we're producing thie actors, a kind of more important than the director, right?
So riding stuff that gets an actor excited about playing your parts really important.
Unfilmables may be a key to that, because you running in a performance and make them go away. I want to write that I want to play that character and my gut feeling now. Is that running?
You know, Chazz Chazz looks out the window is not particularly exciting for an actor right there. The day the moment style probably wouldn't work for you is a speck writer unless you David fucking Mamet, because people going to read that and go her. Who cares?
Where is something that's really more like Steve's Alley and in terms of performance or any of the other examples, maybe more attractive. So be interesting to see whether that lines up with and you know she's only one person and she's going to have our own biases, but nonetheless interesting.
Yes, As always, if you We've been getting great feedback on the previous episode s Oh, please continue to argue with us on the interwebs.
But if you want Mohr draft zero Mohr often wonderful patriots are making this happen,
in particular, thanks to Devon, Jack, Matteo, Nick, Daniel, Carry, Chris, Paul, Sandra and Crab and just want to take a quick moment for special thanks to,
Rob and Sunday who were patrons right from the beginning and both of whom have written to us to let them let us know that they are no longer supporting us due to changes in their financial situation.
Sunday is an amazing director and wish her all the best.
And Rob is an Aussie writer who is saving his pennies to go to L. A. To break in.
So hopefully he will become a sublimely successful screenwriter who will give you and me work and will interview him in future episodes of draft zero.
Hi, man. Thank you very much.
I hope you all feel like arguing with either stu willis myself about anything on this episode or anything in general, and you can find many ways of getting in touch with us at our website at draft zero dot com and the website.
You also find the show notes for this and all our other episodes, as well as links to support us and spread the word for free via rating and review on Apple podcast. Very important for spreading word.
Or if you think that what we do here is worth a dollar or preferably more than a dollar, then you can also find links to our patron. Page two support us getting these episodes to you quicker.
Thanks and thanks for listening.
Mister Wait. I'm sure he's very good at this chess thing, but that isn't really the issue of what I'm I'm sorry.
I just think I'm sure he's very good at it, but it worries me.
If I could make an analogy if it was like, say, Oh, I don't know cards, Peanut, peanut.
Funny. She's comparing chess to pinochle. What am I supposed to say? That trying to make it?
Maybe we should any thinks he's spending too much time in Vinnie. Vinnie's a drug addict.
I'm supposed to listen to his opinion, too.
I'm sorry, but your analogy is a very bad one. If you want to make a comparison, is something compared to something that makes sense.
Compare it to math or music or art because otherwise it belittles him and it and me. No, I don't mean to belittle you, but you are.
You are even the way you're looking at me. Mr Waste. I think perhaps you want to know how good he is.
I'll tell you how good he is. He's better at this than I've ever been at anything in my life.
He is better at this than you'll ever be at anything my son has he has a gift, and once you acknowledge that, then maybe we'll have something to talk about.